ACCA: The Air Conditioning Contractors of America, a national trade association
that represents heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and refrigeration
contractors.

AIR HANDLING UNIT: Equipment with a heating element and/or cooling coil and other
components in a cabinet or casing.

ARI: Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute, a non-profit, voluntary
organization composed of heating, air conditioning and refrigeration
manufacturers. ARI publishes standards for testing and rating heat pumps and air
conditioners.

BALANCING: or AIR BALANCING Adjusting an air conditioning system so that the
right amount of air is delivered to the right places in your home in order to
achieve the right heating or cooling effect.

BTU: British Thermal Unit, the measurement of heating and air conditioning
capacity. A BTU is the amount of heat that must be added to one pound of water
to raise its temperature one degree Fahrenheit.

CFC: Chlorofluorocarbons, used as a refrigerant in air conditioners and heat
pumps, linked to the depletion of the ozone layer.

COP Coefficient of performance, an efficiency ratio that compares the amou nt of
heat delivered to the amount of energy used. As with MPG on a car, the higher
the score the more energy efficient the equipment is. Also, see HSPF

COIL A heating or cooling element made of pipe or tubing, usually with plates or
fins.

COMMISSIONING The final step in installing a heating or air conditioning system.
Every component is checked and tested for compliance with codes, ACCA manuals,
manufacturer requirements, and occupant needs. After commissioning, the
technician will: provide documentation of testing, provide all equipment
manuals, and show the homeowner how to operate the system.

CONDENSER (HEAT EXCHANGER) The outside unit of a heating or air conditioning
system. Here the refrigerant condenses from a gas to a liquid and hot or cold
air from the building is released to the outside.

DEHUMIDIFIER A device that removes excess moisture from the air.

DOE The U.S. Department of Energy, the federal agency that sets industry
efficiency standards.

Air source heat pump A device that extracts heat from air, either to heat a
building in winter or cool a building in summer. Ambient 
Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Back to Top

Binary-cycle plant A geothermal electricity generating plant employing a
closed-loop heat exchange system in which the heat of the geothermal fluid (the
"primary fluid") is transferred to a lower-boiling-point fluid (the "secondary"
or "working" fluid), which is thereby vaporized and used to drive a
turbine/generator set. Brine A geothermal solution containing appreciable
amounts of sodium chloride or other salts. C

C

C

COP (Coefficient of Performance) The ratio of heating provided by a heat pump to
the energy it consumes. Higher COP equals higher efficiency.

Cap rock Impermeable rocks such as shale, that overlies the reservoir rock and
traps natural gas and crude oil in the reservoir. Also, impermeable rock
overlying a geothermal reservoir. Also called sealing rock. Cascading heat A
process that uses a stream of geothermal hot water or steam to perform
successive tasks requiring lower and lower temperatures. Condensate Water formed
by condensation of steam. Condenser Equipment that condenses turbine exhaust
steam into condensate. Cooling tower A structure in which heat is removed from
hot condensate. Crust Earth's outer layer of rock. D

Check out our Regional Policy Statement definition of geothermal water.

Check out our Regional Policy Statement definition.

Check out our Waikato Regional Plan definition.

Chloride springs Geothermal springs can be divided into two types, based on the
temperature and composition of the water they produce. Most springs produce
warm, weakly mineralised water.

Chloride springs are rare throughout the Waikato, throughout New Zealand, and
throughout the world. They are very vulnerable to damage from the extraction of
the geothermal fluid for other uses which divert the chloride water away from
the springs.

Compressor The compressor increases the pressure and temperature of the
refrigerant and simultaneously reduces its volume while causing the refrigerant
to move through the geothermal heat pump to facilitate heat transfer between the
air in your home and the heat pump. ClimateMaster offers geothermal heat pumps
with compressors that are either 1 or 2-stage. 2-stage compressors are more
efficient than their 1-stage counterparts.

D

D

DUCT Conduits used to carry air. They can be round or rectangular, sheet metal
or fiberglass or vinyl tubes. In air conditioning systems they carry air from
the home to the air conditioning system or furnace and back to the home.

Desuperheater:  A partial heat recovery system that captures heat from the
refrigerant system as it leaves the compressor and transfers it to the domestic
hot water. The process only provides hot water while the heat pump is operating.
Direct use Use of geothermal heat without first converting it to electricity,
such as for space heating and cooling, food preparation or industrial processes.
District heating A type of direct energy use in which a utility system supplies
multiple users with hot water or steam from a central plant or well field. Dry
steam Very hot steam that does not occur with liquid. E

E

E

EER (Energy Efficiency Ratio) The ratio of cooling provided by a geothermal heat
pump to the energy it consumes. Higher EER equals higher efficiency.

EER Energy Efficiency Ratio. Measurement of cooling efficiency typically applied
when considering geothermal heat pump applications where the source temperature
is relatively constant. (See SEER where declining an/or decreasing air
temperature affects system efficiency.


ENERGY STAR® A government supported branding used to identify energy efficient
products. The branding was developed by the US Department of Energy and the US
Environmental Protection Agency.

EPA The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

ERV Energy Recovery Ventilator, a machine that draws fresh air into the home and
exhausts stale air from the home. It uses a process to preheat or pre-cool
(depending on the season) to reduce energy costs associated with conditioning
the air.


Ecosystems Ecosystems are communities of living things that interact with each
other and their physical environment.

 

Efficiency The ratio of the useful energy output of a machine or other
energy-converting plant to the energy input. Enhanced geothermal systems Rock
fracturing, water injection, and water circulation technologies to sweep heat
from the unproductive areas of existing geothermal fields or new fields lacking
sufficient production capacity. F


Electronic Controls The electronic controls are the brains of a ClimateMaster
geothermal heat pump. They control all aspects of unit operation and receive and
translate information from the thermostat. ClimateMaster geothermal heat pumps
are currently offered with two types of electronic controls:


Endemic Plants and animals that occur naturally only in a specified area or
locality.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): Federal government agency that makes and
enforces standards for pollution control; designed to protect the environment.

External Fixed-Speed Water Flow Control This is the traditional method of water
flow control in which fixed (single-speed) pumps are housed outside of the heat
pump. This method of water flow control requires a bit more space to install and
is not as efficient as vFlow™.

 

F

 

F

 

FAN COIL See AIR HANDLING UNIT

 

FURNACE A self-contained heating unit that is designed to deliver heated air to
a home.

 

Fault A fracture or fracture zone in the Earth's crust along which displacement
of one side relative to the other has occurred at some time. Flash steam Steam
produced when the pressure on a geothermal liquid is reduced. Also called
flashing. Fumarole A vent or hole in the Earth's surface, usually in a volcanic
region, from which steam, gaseous vapors, or hot gases issue. G

 

Fumeroles A fumerole (or fumarole) is a hole from which superheated gas and
steam discharge under pressure.

 

G

 

G


GAMA Gas Appliance Manufacturing Association is a national trade association
serving the interests of manufacturers of gas, oil, and electric appliances and
equipment, components and related products used in residential, commercial, and
industrial applications.

Geothermal Of or relating to the Earth's interior heat. Geothermal energy Energy
available in the ground and rocks beneath the Earth’s crust. Geothermal energy
resources include hot temperature sources such as hot rock, molten rock and
geysers and lower temperature sources in the ground one or two metres below the
surface. Geothermal gradient The rate of temperature increase in the Earth as a
function of depth. Temperature increases an average of 25° C for every kilometre
of descent (1° Fahrenheit for every 75 feet). Geothermal heat pumps Devices that
take advantage of the relatively constant temperature of the Earth's interior,
using it as a source and sink of heat for both heating and cooling. When
cooling, heat is extracted from the space and dissipated into the Earth; when
heating, heat is extracted from the Earth and pumped into the space. Geyser A
spring that shoots jets of hot water and steam into the air. Ground source heat
pumps Ground source heat pumps are similar to air source heat pumps except
instead of absorbing heat from air, they absorb it from the earth. (Also known
as or earth energy systems) H

Geothermal heat pump:  A heat pump that uses the earth as a heat source and heat
sink that uses a loop of buried plastic pipe as a heat exchanger.


H


H


HCFC Hydrochlorofluorocarbons, used as a refrigerant in air conditioners and
heat pumps. Older types of refrigerants containing HCFCs were thought to
contribute to the depletion of the earth's ozone layer.


HDR (hot dry rock): subsurface geologic formations of abnormally high heat
content that contain little or no water.

HDR (hot dry rock): subsurface geologic formations of abnormally high heat
content that contain little or no water.

HDR Hot dry rock. Subsurface geologic formations of abnormally high heat content
that contain little or no water. Heat exchanger A device such as a coiled copper
tube immersed in a tank of water that is used to transfer heat from one fluid to
another through a separating wall. Heat flow Movement of heat from within the
Earth to the surface, where it is dissipated into the atmosphere, surface water,
and space by radiation. Hydrothermal resource Underground systems of heat, hot
water and/or steam. Originally used to describe high-temperature water and steam
reseources such as geysers and deep hot water reservoirs, the term now includes
lower temperature earth energy resources. I

 

HEAT EXCHANGER 1.The part of a furnace that transfers heat from burning fuel to
the air used to heat your home. Also, from a boiler to water for hydronic
heating. Or water from the earth water to air or water in the building for
geothermal. 2. A device, such as a condenser or evaporator, in which heat is
added or removed in order to heat or cool your home.


HEAT PUMP A single refrigeration system designed to provide both heating and
cooling. Compare to a furnace and an air conditioner, separate units that only
heat or cool.


HFC Hydroflorocarbon, used as a refrigerant in air conditioners and heat pumps.
It has little or no effect on the ozone layer.

HRV Heat Recovery Ventilator, a machine that brings fresh air into a home
through a process that preheats the air so it has less impact on your utility
bill.

HSPF Heating Seasonal Performance Factor, an equipment efficiency rating. As
with MPG on a car, the higher the rating the more fuel-efficient the equipment
is. Also, see COP.

 

HUMIDIFIER A device that adds moisture to warm air for your home.


HVAC Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning


HVACR Heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and refrigeration


Heat pump:  A mechanical device used for heating and cooling that operates by
pumping heat from a cooler to a warmer location. Heat pumps can extract heat
from air, water, or the earth. They are classified as either air-source or
ground-source (geothermal) units.


Heat sink:  The medium – air, water or earth – which receives heat rejected from
a heat pump.

Heat source:  The medium (air, water or earth) from which heat is extracted by a
heat pump.

I


I


IAQ Indoor air quality


INFILTRATION Air that enters your home through holes, gaps, and cracks, (e.g.,
plumbing or electrical holes, the heating and air conditioning system, doors,
and windows).

 

Indoor Fan The indoor fan is responsible for circulating conditioned air
throughout a home’s air conditioning ductwork and is housed inside of the heat
pump. ClimateMaster heat pumps are currently offered with 2 types of indoor
fans:


Injection (geothermal) The process of returning spent geothermal fluids to the
subsurface. Sometimes referred to as reinjection. M


K


K


L


L

LATENT HEAT The energy that suspends moisture vapor in the air.

LOAD CALCULATION A mathematical determination of how much cooling and heating
(BTUs) an HVAC system must deliver for occupant safety and comfort. It is based
on a variety of factors: square footage, building orientation, number of
occupants, size and placement of rooms, number and size of windows and doors,
amount of insulation, number of floors, and climate.


M


M


MANUAL D® An ACCA procedure covering the proper design, installation,
maintenance, and repair of ductwork.


MANUAL J® An ACCA procedure covering the method for calculating heating and
cooling requirements (load calculation) for single-family detached homes and
mobile homes.


MANUAL RS® An ACCA publication covering the design, installation, and
commissioning of a residential HVAC system.

MATCHED SYSTEM An air conditioner or heat pump system composed of equipment that
has been certified by ARI to work together to deliver the specified heating and
cooling capacity at the stated efficiency rating.

MOLD A natural byproduct of the fungi family that thrives when organic
substances and water combine under certain circumstances. Mold reproduces via
spores that can remain dormant, yet viable, for years. Many molds are
beneficial. For example, they are the "bleu" in bleu cheese, and we use them to
make wine, penicillin, and antibiotics. However, some molds can cause health
problems.


Magma Molten rock within the Earth, from which igneous rock is formed by
cooling. Mantle The layer of the Earth lying beneath the Earth's crust and above
the Earth's molten outer core of iron and nickel. The mantle can be divided into
two parts, an upper solid but ductile upper mantle and a more rigid lower
mantle. P


Megawatts (MW) A watt is a unit of power or how much energy was produced in a
certain time (one watt equals one joule per second). A megawatt is 106 watts.


Micro-organisms Very small living organisms which can usually only be seen
through a microscope (includes bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa).

Mineralised fluids Water and steam containing minerals such as silica, lithium
and boron. Also called geothermal water or geothermal fluids.

NATE North American Technician Excellence, the nonprofit organization that tests
and certifies HVACR technicians.


Non-Communicating Controls These are traditional electronic controls that do not
support 2-way communication. These will get the job done but are not able to
control geothermal system operation as efficiently as iGate™ communicating
controls.


O

O

Open-loop heat pump:  A heat pump system that uses groundwater from a well. The
water is then returned to the environment.


Other springs, known as chloride springs, produce hot or boiling, heavily
mineralised alkaline water that is high in chloride and silica. All geysers and
springs that produce sinter terraces are chloride springs, for example those at
Orakeikorako and Waiotapu.

P

P


PMA Planned maintenance agreement, which provides regular maintenance of your
HVACR system. Most ACCA member contractors offer PMAs, although they may use
different names for them, such as Maintenance Inspection Agreement, Planned
Service Agreement, Energy Service Plan, etc.


Pangaea: the huge supercontinent which scientists think may have existed 250
million years ago. All of the continents may have at one time been joined
together to make this huge land mass.


Payback:  A method of calculating how long it will take to recover the
difference in costs of two different heating and cooling systems by using the
energy and maintenance cost savings from the more efficient system.


Permeability The capacity of a substance (such as rock) to transmit a fluid,
such as crude oil, natural gas, or water. The degree of permeability depends on
the number, size, and shape of the pores and/or fractures in the rock and their
interconnections. It is measured by the time it takes a fluid of standard
viscosity to move a given distance. The unit of permeability is the Darcy. Plate
tectonics A theory of global-scale dynamics involving the movement of the many
rigid plates that make up the Earth's crust. Tectonic activity is evident along
the margins of the plates where buckling, grinding, faulting, and vulcanism
occur as the plates are propelled by the forces of deep-seated mantle convection
currents. Geothermal resources are often associated with tectonic activity,
since it allows groundwater to come in contact with deep subsurface heat
sources. Porosity The capacity od a reservoir to store fluids. The ratio of the
aggregate volume of pore spaces in rock or soil to its total volume, usually
stated as a per cent. R


Petajoules (PJ) A joule is a unit of energy. A petajoule is 1015 joules.

R-22 A refrigerant containing chlorine used in air conditioning systems. The EPA
has mandated that R-22 cannot be manufactured after 2010 because it has been
linked to the depletion of the ozone layer and global warming. Most commonly
referred to by its trademarked name, Freon.

R-410A The refrigerant that replaces R-22. It does not contain chlorine and is
not hazardous to the environment.


REFRIGERANT A fluid that absorbs heat at low temperatures and rejects heat at
higher temperatures.

REFRIGERANT CHARGE (or, "charging the refrigerant") The procedure an HVACR
technician performs to ensure that the system has enough of the right kind
refrigerant for peak operating performance.

RELATIVE HUMIDITY (RH) The percent of moisture actually in the air compared to
the maximum amount of moisture the air can hold at that temperature.


RETURN, RETURN AIR, RETURN SIDE The path the air takes to get to an air-handling
unit or furnace so it can be cooled or heated. It is the "return" path. The
return side should be "balanced" with the supply side to ensure proper air flow
and comfort.


Reservoir (Geothermal) A porous and permeable underground rock formation
containing a natural accumulation of high-temperature water that is confined by
impermeable rock or water barriers, and is separate from other reservoirs. S


Ring of Fire: a belt of intense volcanic, geothermal and earthquake activity
found all around the Pacific Rim caused by plate tectonic activity.


S


S

SEER Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio, an equipment efficiency rating that
measures how much energy it takes to cool the air. As with MPG on a car, the
higher the number the more efficient the unit.

SENSIBLE HEAT The temperature of the air. This type of heat is measured with a
thermometer.

 

SPLIT SYSTEM A two-component heating and cooling (heat pump) or cooling only
(air conditioner) system. The condensing unit is installed outside, the air
handling unit is installed inside (preferably in conditioned space). Refrigerant
lines and wiring connect them together.


SUPPLY or SUPPLY SIDE The part of an HVAC system that takes (supplies) the
conditioned air from the air-handling unit or furnace to your home. The supply
side should be "balanced" with the return side to ensure proper air flow and
comfort.


Salinity A measure of the quantity or concentration of dissolved salts in water.
Subsidence Sinking of an area of the Earth's crust due to fluid withdrawal and
pressure decline. T

 

Single Speed Indoor Fan The single speed indoor fan operates at only one speed.
It gets the job done but is not as energy efficient as the variable speed fan.


Sinter A mineral crust or deposit formed from the minerals (mainly silica) in
geothermal water, especially from geysers.


T

T

TDS Total dissolved solids. Used to describe the amount of solid materials in
water. Thermal gradient The rate of increase or decrease in the Earth's
temperature relative to depth. Transmission line Structures and conductors that
carry bulk supplies of electrical energy from power-generating units. Turbine A
rotary engine that converts the energy of a moving stream of water, steam or gas
into mechanical energy. Turbines are classified as hydraulic (water) turbines,
steam turbines or gas turbines. Turbine-power generators produce most of the
world's electricity. Windmills that generate electicity are known as wind
turbines. V


Vapour-dominated A geothermal reservoir system in which subsurface pressures are
controlled by vapour rather than by liquid. Sometimes referred to as a dry-steam
reservoir. W

Variable Speed Indoor Fan ClimateMaster’s variable-speed indoor fan
intelligently varies fan speed to minimize energy consumption. This is
ClimateMaster’s most efficient indoor fan option.

W

W


Water Flow Control In order for a geothermal heating and cooling system to
 exchange heat via its underground loop, water must be continuously circulated
 between the ground and the heat pump. This is the job of the water flow
 control. ClimateMaster offers 2 different water flow control methods in its
 geothermal heat pumps:

Watt (W): the measure of the amount of current flowing through a wire at a given
time.

Well logging Assessing the geologic, engineering, and physical properties and
characteristics of geothermal reservoirs with instruments placed in the
wellbore.


ZONES, ZONED SYSTEM, ZONING A single HVAC system that can meet different heating
and cooling needs in different areas (zones). Each zone of a home has its own
thermostat with which it can regulate the temperature and humidity in its area.
One "zoned air conditioner" could be set for a high temperature in one zone and
for a lower temperature in the other zone. Zone systems have two or more zones A

 

acid rain: common name for any precipitation (rain, snow, sleet, hail, fog)
having a high amount of sulfuric acid and/or nitric acid or having a pH lower
than 5.6. Normal rain has a pH of 5.6 - 5.7. Accumulation of acids in lakes and
rivers damages or kills plant and animal life. Acid rain also dissolves building
materials and leaches nutrients out of soil resulting in crop damage. Fossil
fuel power plants are a major source of acid rain.


agriculture: the growing (farming) of plants, flowers, trees, grains, and other
crops. Greenhouses can be heated with hot water from geothermal reservoirs. In
some places pipes of hot water are buried under the soil. Geothermal heat is
also used to dry crops.


aquaculture: the farming of fish and other water-dwelling organisms in
freshwater or seawater. Geothermal water is used to help speed the growth of
fish, prawns and alligators. China is probably has more aquaculture operations
than any other country.

aquifer: a large permeable body of underground rock capable of yielding
quantities of water to springs or wells. Aquifers provide about 60 percent of
American drinking water. Underground aquifers of hot water and steam are called
geothermal reservoirs.

aquifer: a large permeable body of underground rock capable of yielding
quantities of water to springs or wells. Underground aquifers of hot water and
steam form geothermal reservoirs.

 

aquifer: a large permeable body of underground rock capable of yielding
quantities of water to springs or wells. Underground aquifers of hot water and
steam form geothermal reservoirs.

 

balneology: using hot spring mineral water for therapy. This is perhaps the
oldest use of natural geothermal waters.

 

baseload plants: electricity-generating units that are operated to meet the
minimum load on the supply system.

 

baseload plants: electricity-generating units that are operated to meet the
minimum load on the supply system.

 

binary-cycle plant: a geothermal electricity generating plant employing a
closed-loop heat exchange system in which the heat of the geothermal fluid (the
"primary fluid") is transferred to a lower-boiling-point fluid (the "secondary"
or "working" fluid), which is thereby vaporised and used to drive a
turbine/generator set.

 

binary-cycle plant: a geothermal electricity generating plant employing a
closed-loop heat exchange system in which the heat of the geothermal fluid (the
"primary fluid") is transferred to a lower-boiling-point fluid (the "secondary"
or "working" fluid), which is thereby vaporised and used to drive a
turbine/generator set.

 

boiling point: temperature at which a single substance, such as water, changes
from a liquid to a gas (steam) at a given pressure. Some liquids boil at a lower
temperature than water, a principle utilised in binary power plants. Boiling
point is also affected by pressure. The greater the pressure, the higher the
boiling point. This principle is put to work in geothermal (flash) power plants
when geothermal water is brought up wells. Some of the hot water flashes to
steam when the pressure is released as it rises to the surface or passes through
surface equipment. This phenomenon also occurs naturally, resulting in such
features as geysers.

 

boiling point: temperature at which a single substance, such as water, changes
from a liquid to a gas (steam) at a given pressure. Some liquids boil at a lower
temperature than water, a principle utilised in binary power plants. Boiling
point is also affected by pressure. The greater the pressure, the higher the
boiling point. This principle is put to work in geothermal (flash) power plants
when geothermal water is brought up wells. Some of the hot water flashes to
steam when the pressure is released as it rises to the surface or passes through
surface equipment. This phenomenon also occurs naturally, resulting in such
features as geysers.


boiling point: temperature at which a single substance, such as water, changes
from a liquid to a gas (steam) under normal atmospheric pressure. The boiling
point at which water transitions to steam is 212°F (100°C). Some liquids boil at
a lower temperature than water -- a principle utilized in binary power plants.
Boiling point is also affected by pressure. The greater the pressure, the higher
the boiling point. This principle is put to work in geothermal (flash) power
plants when superheated (hotter than boiling) geothermal water is brought up
wells. The hot water flashes to steam when the pressure is released as it
reaches the surface. This phenomenon also occurs naturally, resulting in such
features as geysers.

brine: a geothermal solution containing appreciable amounts of sodium chloride
or other salts.

brine: a geothermal solution containing appreciable amounts of sodium chloride
or other salts.


caldera: a bowl-shaped landform, created either by a huge volcanic explosion
(which destroys the top of a volcano) or by the collapse of a volcano's top.


caldera: a bowl-shaped landform, created either by a huge volcanic explosion
(which destroys the top of a volcano) or by the collapse of a volcano's top.


caldera: a bowl-shaped landform, created either by a huge volcanic explosion
(which destroys the top of a volcano) or by the collapse of a volcano's top.


cap rocks: rocks of low permeability that overlie a geothermal reservoir.

cap rocks: rocks of low permeability that overlie a geothermal reservoir.

carbon dioxide (CO2): a gas produced by the combustion of fossil fuels and other
substances. CO2 also occurs naturally in large amounts in molten magma, which is
involved in the explosive eruption of volcanoes. See Greenhouse Effect.

 

carbon dioxide (CO2): a gas produced by the combustion of fossil fuels and other
substances. CO2 also occurs naturally in large amounts in molten magma, which is
involved in the explosive eruption of volcanoes. See Greenhouse Effect.


carbon dioxide (CO2): a gas produced by the combustion of fossil fuels and other
substances. CO2 also occurs naturally in large amounts in molten magma, which is
involved in the explosive eruption of volcanoes. See Greenhouse Effect.


cascading heat: a process that uses a stream of geothermal hot water or steam to
perform successive tasks requiring lower and lower temperatures.

cascading heat: a process that uses a stream of geothermal hot water or steam to
perform successive tasks requiring lower and lower temperatures.

chemical energy: energy inherent in the chemical bonds which hold molecules
together. Examples are coal and oil, which have energy potential that is
released upon combustion.

 

chloride spring: geothermal springs can be divided into two types based on the
temperature and composition of the water they produce. Most springs produce
warm, weakly mineralised water. Chloride springs, produce hot or boiling,
heavily mineralised alkaline water that is high in chloride and silica. All
geysers and springs that produce sinter terraces are chloride springs, for
example those at Orakei Korako and Waiotapu. Chloride springs are vulnerable to
damage from the extraction of the geothermal fluid for other uses which divert
the chloride water away from the springs.


chloride spring: geothermal springs can be divided into two types based on the
temperature and composition of the water they produce. Most springs produce
warm, weakly mineralised water. Chloride springs, produce hot or boiling,
heavily mineralised alkaline water that is high in chloride and silica. All
geysers and springs that produce sinter terraces are chloride springs, for
example those at Orakei Korako and Waiotapu. Chloride springs are vulnerable to
damage from the extraction of the geothermal fluid for other uses which divert
the chloride water away from the springs.


combustion: the burning of gas, liquid, or solid, in which the fuel is oxidized,
producing heat and often light.


condensate: liquid water formed by condensation of steam.


condensate: liquid water formed by condensation of steam.

condense: to change from a gas to drops of liquid. Water-cooled geothermal power
plants use cooling towers to cool the used steam and condense it back to water
for injection back to the edge of the reservoir. In binary power plants, an
organic liquid is first vaporized (with heat from geothermal water) to drive a
turbine, then cooled and condensed back to a liquid and recycled again and again
in a closed loop.

condense: to change from a gas to liquid. In conventional condensing geothermal
power plants, steam is vented from turbines into a condenser where cooled water
is sprayed on the steam to condense it. The condensate can be recycled using a
cooling tower to extract more heat. An equivalent system exists for binary power
plants, but with the organic liquid being recycled in a closed loop.


condense: to change from a gas to liquid. In conventional condensing geothermal
power plants, steam is vented from turbines into a condenser where cooled water
is sprayed on the steam to condense it. The condensate can be recycled using a
cooling tower to extract more heat. An equivalent system exists for binary power
plants, but with the organic liquid being recycled in a closed loop.


condenser: equipment that condenses turbine exhaust steam into condensate.


condenser: equipment that condenses turbine exhaust steam into condensate.

 

conduction: the transfer of heat as a result of the direct contact of rapidly
moving molecules through a medium or from one medium to another, without
movement of the media. The heat from geothermal water, for instance can be
conducted through metal plates or pipes to heat other water for district heating
systems or a second organic liquid for use in binary power plants.


continental drift: the theory that the continents have drifted apart when a
supercontinent, Pangaea, broke apart. See Plate Tectonics.


convection currents: the currents caused by hot air or fluid rising and falling.
Hot air or fluid expands and is therefore less dense than its cooler
surroundings, thus it rises; as it cools it contracts, becomes more dense and
sinks down creating something of a rolling motion. These motions are thought to
be party of the dynamic geologic processes that drive the movement of crustal
plates. See Plate Tectonics


cooling tower: a structure in which heat is removed from hot condensate through
heat exchange with air.


cooling tower: a structure in which heat is removed from hot condensate through
heat exchange with air.


core (outer and inner): the extremely hot center of the Earth. The outer core is
probably molten rock and is located about 3,200 miles (5,100) kilometers down
from the earth’s surface; the inner core may be solid iron and is found a the
very center of the Earth- about 4,000 miles (6,400 kilometers) down.

crust: the solid outermost layer of the Earth, mostly consisting of rock, and
ranging from 3 - 35 miles (4.8 - 56 kilometers) thick, comprises the topmost
portion of the lithosphere (see lithospheric plates). Earth's crust insulates us
from the hot interior.

cultivate: to grow and tend (plants or crops), farm.


dehydrate: to free from moisture in order to preserve; to dry fruits, vegetables
or lumber, for instance. A factory in in Nevada, for example uses geothermal
heat to dehydrate onions and garlic for restaurants.


density: the amount of mass in a given volume of something. Two objects can be
the same size, but have different densities because one of the objects has more
mass "packed" into the same amount of space. Objects are smaller when they are
cold, larger when hot.


direct use: use of geothermal heat without first converting it to electricity,
such as for space heating and cooling, food preparation, industrial processes,
or bathing.


direct use: use of geothermal heat without first converting it to electricity,
such as for space heating and cooling, food preparation, industrial processes,
or bathing.


direct use: use of geothermal water and it's heat to grow fish, dry vegetable,
fruit and wood products, heat greenhouses and city buildings, or provide hot
water for spas.

district heating system: a heating system that provides heat to a large number
of buildings all from a central facility. In geothermal district heating
systems, one or more wells can serve entire districts.

drilling: boring into the Earth to access geothermal resources, usually with oil
and gas drilling equipment that has been modified to meet geothermal
requirements.


drilling: boring into the Earth to access geothermal resources, usually with oil
and gas drilling equipment that has been modified to meet geothermal
requirements.


dry steam: superheated steam without a water phase.


dry steam: superheated steam without a water phase.

dry-steam reservoir: a geothermal reservoir system in which subsurface pressures
are controlled by steam rather than by water.

dry-steam reservoir: a geothermal reservoir system in which subsurface pressures
are controlled by steam rather than by water.


earthquake: the vibration or movement of the ground caused by a sudden shift
along faults (cracks) in the earth's crust; most earthquakes occur at the places
where tectonic plates edges meet.


efficiency: the ratio of the useful energy output of a machine or other
energy-converting plant to the energy input. Technology with a higher energy
efficiency will require less energy to do the same amount of work.

efficiency: the ratio of the useful energy output of a machine or other
energy-converting plant to the energy input. Technology with a higher energy
efficiency will require less energy to do the same amount of work.

electric current: the continuous flow of electrons; often referred to as
electricity.


electrical energy: energy of electric charges or electric currents.

electron: the smallest part of an atom (atoms are the tiny particles of which
all substances are made). Electrons may be freed from atoms to produce an
electric current.

emission: the release or discharge of a substance into the environment;
generally refers to the release of gases or particulates into the air.


emission: the release or discharge of a substance into the environment;
generally refers to the release of gases or particulates into the air.


energy conversion the changing of energy from one form to another. One of the
many examples are heat energy being converted into mechanical energy, and then
mechanical energy into electrical energy, as is done in steam-driven electric
power plants.


energy efficiency: the measure of the amount of energy which any technology can
convert to useful work; technology with a higher energy efficiency will require
less energy to do the same amount of work.


energy resource: a source of useable power which can be drawn on when needed.
Energy resources are often classified as renewable or non-renewable.


energy: the ability to do work, such as making things move and heating them up.
Energy can take many forms, including electrical, chemical, radiant, mechanical
and heat.

enhanced geothermal systems: rock fracturing, water injection, and water
circulation technologies used to sweep heat from the unproductive areas of
existing geothermal fields or new fields lacking sufficient production capacity.

enhanced geothermal systems: rock fracturing, water injection, and water
circulation technologies used to sweep heat from the unproductive areas of
existing geothermal fields or new fields lacking sufficient production capacity.


eruption: the explosive discharge of material such as molten rock and gases, or
hot water (as from volcanoes or geysers).

fault: a crack or break in the Earth’s crust along which movement has occurred,
often resulting in earthquakes.

fault: a fracture or fracture zone in the Earth's crust along which slippage of
adjacent rocks has occurred.


fault: a fracture or fracture zone in the Earth's crust along which slippage of
adjacent rocks has occurred.


flash plant: pressure vessels designed to effectively separate flash steam from
the liquid phase.


flash plant: pressure vessels designed to effectively separate flash steam from
the liquid phase.


flash steam: steam produced when the pressure on a geothermal liquid is reduced.
Also called flashing.


flash steam: steam produced when the pressure on a geothermal liquid is reduced.
Also called flashing.

fracture: a crack in the Earth's crust along which no movement has occurred.

fracture: a crack in the Earth's crust along which no movement has occurred.

 

fracture: a crack in the Earth’s crust along which no movement has occurred.


fumarole: a hole or vent from which superheated gas and steam discharges under
pressure.


fumarole: a hole or vent from which superheated gas and steam discharges under
pressure.

 

fumarole: a small hole or vent in the Earth's surface, found near volcanic
areas, from which steam or gases shoot out.


generator: a machine that converts mechanical power into electricity by spinning
copper wires (conductors) within a magnetic field.


geothermal (ground source) heat pump: a space heating/cooling system which moves
heat from and to the earth, as opposed to making heat using a fuel source.
Geothermal heat pumps take advantage of the almost constant temperature just a
few feet underground -- usually warmer than the air in winter and cooler than
the air in summer.

geothermal energy: the Earth's interior heat made available by extraction of
geothermal fluids.

geothermal energy: the Earth's interior heat made available by extraction of
geothermal fluids.


geothermal gradient: the rate of temperature increase in the Earth as a function
of depth.

geothermal gradient: the rate of temperature increase in the Earth as a function
of depth.

geothermal heat pumps: devices that take advantage of the relatively constant
temperature of the Earth's subsurface, using it as a source and sink of heat for
both heating and cooling. When cooling, heat is extracted from the space and
dissipated into the Earth; when heating, heat is extracted from the Earth and
pumped into the space.

geothermal heat pumps: devices that take advantage of the relatively constant
temperature of the Earth's subsurface, using it as a source and sink of heat for
both heating and cooling. When cooling, heat is extracted from the space and
dissipated into the Earth; when heating, heat is extracted from the Earth and
pumped into the space.

geothermal phenomena: an observable event at the surface, whose occurrence is
the result of the Earth’s internal heat; includes volcanoes, geysers, hot
springs, mud pots and fumaroles.

geothermal power plant: a facility which uses geothermal steam or heat to drive
turbine-generators to produce electricity. Three different types make use of the
various temperature ranges of geothermal resources: dry steam, flash and binary.

geothermal power plant: a facility which uses geothermal steam or heat to drive
turbine-generators to produce electricity. Three different types make use of the
various temperature ranges of geothermal resources: dry steam, flash and binary.

geothermal power plant: a facility which uses geothermal steam or heat to drive
turbine-generators to produce electricity. Three different types make use of the
various temperature ranges of geothermal resources: dry steam, flash and binary.

geothermal reservoir: a large volume of underground hot water and steam in
porous and fractured hot rock. The hot water in geothermal reservoirs occupies
only 2 to 5% of the volume of rock, but if the reservoir is large enough and hot
enough, it can be a powerful source of energy. Geothermal reservoirs are
sometimes overlain by a layer of impermeable rock. While geothermal reservoirs
usually have surface manifestations such as hot springs or fumaroles, some do
not.

geothermal reservoir: a large volume of underground hot water and steam in
porous and fractured hot rock. The hot water in geothermal reservoirs occupies
only 2 to 5% of the volume of rock, but if the reservoir is large enough and hot
enough, it can be a powerful source of energy. Geothermal reservoirs are
sometimes overlain by a layer of impermeable rock. While geothermal reservoirs
usually have surface manifestations such as hot springs or fumaroles, some do
not.

geothermal reservoir: a large volume of underground hot water and steam in
porous and fractured hot rock. The hot water in geothermal reservoirs occupies
only 2 to 5% of the volume of rock, but if the reservoir is large enough and hot
enough, it can be a powerful source of energy. Geothermal reservoirs are
sometimes overlain by a layer of impermeable rock. While geothermal reservoirs
usually have surface manifestations such as hot springs or fumaroles, some do
not.

geothermal resource: the natural heat, hot water, and steam within the Earth

geothermal water: water heated by the natural heat inside the Earth.

geothermal: of or relating to the Earth's interior heat.

geothermal: of or relating to the Earth's interior heat.

geyser: a natural hot spring that sends up a fountain of water and steam into
the air; some geysers "spout" at regular intervals and some are unpredictable.

geyser: a natural hot spring that sends up a fountain of water and steam into
the air; some geysers "spout" at regular intervals and some are unpredictable.

geyser: a natural hot spring that sends up a fountain of water and steam into
the air; some geysers "spout" at regular intervals and some are unpredictable.

global warming/greenhouse effect: the trapping of heat in the atmosphere.
Incoming solar radiation goes through the atmosphere to the Earth's surface, but
outgoing radiation (heat) is absorbed by water vapor, carbon dioxide, and ozone
in the atmosphere. At certain levels this is beneficial because it keeps the
planet warm enough for life as we know it. However, an increase in the normal
amount of carbon dioxide and other gases may contribute to a human-caused
warming trend that could have serious effects on global climate, the global
ecosystem, and food supplies.

global warming/greenhouse effect: the trapping of heat in the atmosphere.
Incoming solar radiation goes through the atmosphere to the Earth's surface, but
outgoing radiation (heat) is absorbed by water vapour, carbon dioxide, and ozone
in the atmosphere. At certain levels this is beneficial because it keeps the
planet warm enough for life as we know it. However, an increase in the normal
amount of carbon dioxide and other gases may contribute to a human-caused
warming trend that could have serious effects on global climate, the global
ecosystem, and food supplies.

global warming/greenhouse effect: the trapping of heat in the atmosphere.
Incoming solar radiation goes through the atmosphere to the Earth's surface, but
outgoing radiation (heat) is absorbed by water vapour, carbon dioxide, and ozone
in the atmosphere. At certain levels this is beneficial because it keeps the
planet warm enough for life as we know it. However, an increase in the normal
amount of carbon dioxide and other gases may contribute to a human-caused
warming trend that could have serious effects on global climate, the global
ecosystem, and food supplies.

greenhouse effect: the presence of trace atmospheric gases make the earth warmer
than would direct sunlight alone. These gases (carbon dioxide [CO2], methane
[CH4], nitrous oxide [N2O], tropospheric ozone [O3], and water vapour [H2O])
allow visible light and ultraviolet light (shortwave radiation) to pass through
the atmosphere and heat the earth's surface. This heat is re-radiated from the
earth in the form of infrared energy (longwave radiation). The greenhouse gases
absorb part of that energy before it escapes into space. This process of
trapping the longwave radiation is known as the greenhouse effect.

greenhouse effect: the presence of trace atmospheric gases make the earth warmer
than would direct sunlight alone. These gases (carbon dioxide [CO2], methane
[CH4], nitrous oxide [N2O], tropospheric ozone [O3], and water vapour [H2O])
allow visible light and ultraviolet light (shortwave radiation) to pass through
the atmosphere and heat the earth's surface. This heat is re-radiated from the
earth in the form of infrared energy (longwave radiation). The greenhouse gases
absorb part of that energy before it escapes into space. This process of
trapping the longwave radiation is known as the greenhouse effect.

health spa: an establishment (often commercial) which is visited by guests
seeking therapy and relaxation; many center around hot mineral springs or use
hot water from geothermal wells.

heat exchanger: a device for transferring thermal energy from one fluid to
another.

heat exchanger: a device for transferring thermal energy from one fluid to
another.

heat exchanger: a device in which heat is transferred by conduction through a
metal barrier from a hotter liquid or gas, to warm a cooler liquid or gas on the
other side of the metal barrier. Types of heat exchangers include "shell and
tube," and "plate."

heat flow: movement of heat from within the Earth to the surface, where it is
dissipated into the atmosphere, surface water, and space by radiation.

heat flow: movement of heat from within the Earth to the surface, where it is
dissipated into the atmosphere, surface water, and space by radiation.
| a -c | d-g | h-n | p-r | s-z |

heat transfer: the transmission of heat. There are three forms of heat transfer:
"conduction," "convection," and "radiation." See these terms.

hot spot: areas of volcanic activity found in the middle of lithospheric plates,
caused from an upwelling of concentrated heat in the mantle. Hot spots remain
stationary while the plates move over them, often leaving a chain of extinct
volcanoes as the plate moves away from the hot spot; examples include the
Hawaiian Islands and Yellowstone National Park.

hot springs: a natural spring that puts out water warmer than body temperature
and therefore feels hot; may collect in pools or flow into streams an lakes. A
geothermal phenomenon.

hot springs: a natural spring that puts out water warmer than body temperature
and therefore feels hot; may collect in pools or flow into streams and lakes. A
geothermal phenomenon.

hot springs: a natural spring that puts out water warmer than body temperature
and therefore feels hot; may collect in pools or flow into streams and lakes. A
geothermal phenomenon.

hydrothermal: hydro means water and thermal means heat. Literally hydrothermal
means hot water. Steam and hot water reservoirs are hydrothermal reservoirs. Hot
dry rock resources and magma resources are not considered to be hydrothermal
resources.

hydrothermal: hydro means water and thermal means heat. Literally hydrothermal
means hot water. Steam and hot water reservoirs are hydrothermal reservoirs. Hot
dry rock resources and magma resources are not considered to be hydrothermal
resources.

hydrothermal: hydro means water and thermal means heat. Literally hydrothermal
means hot water. Steam and hot water reservoirs are hydrothermal reservoirs. Hot
dry rock resources and magma resources are not considered to be hydrothermal
resources.

iGate™ Communicating Controls iGate™ Communicating Controls allow for 2-way
communication between the thermostat and heat pump and analyzes the status of
sensors and other 2-way communicating components to determine how best to
operate your system for optimal comfort, efficiency, and long term reliability.
iGate™ technology represents the next generation in intelligent controls and
will allow for future accessories to access and control your system via internet
devices. iGate™ controls are available only in the Tranquility® Digital Series.

impermeable: does not allow liquids to pass through easily -- certain rock types
and clay soil are impermeable.

impermeable: does not allow liquids to pass through easily -- certain rock types
and clay soil are impermeable.

impermeable: does not allow liquids to pass through easily -- certain rock types
and clay soil are impermeable.

injection well: a well through which geothermal water is returned to an
underground reservoir after use. Geothermal production and injection wells are
constructed of pipes layered inside one another and cemented into the earth and
to each other. This protects any shallow drinking water aquifers from mixing
with deeper geothermal water.

injection well: a well through which geothermal water is returned to an
underground reservoir after use. Geothermal production and injection wells are
constructed of pipes layered inside one another and cemented into the earth and
to each other. This protects any shallow drinking water aquifers from mixing
with deeper geothermal water.

injection well: a well through which geothermal water is returned to an
underground reservoir after use. Geothermal production and injection wells are
constructed of pipes layered inside one another and cemented into the earth and
to each other. This protects any shallow drinking water aquifers from mixing
with deeper geothermal water.

injection: the process of returning spent geothermal fluids to the subsurface;
also referred to as reinjection.

injection: the process of returning spent geothermal fluids to the subsurface;
also referred to as reinjection.

| a -c | d-g | h-n | p-r | s-z |

kilowatt (kW): one thousand watts of electricity.

kilowatt (kW): one thousand watts of electricity.

kilowatt hour (kWh): one thousand watthours.

kilowatt hour (kWh): one thousand watthours.

lava: molten magma that has reached the Earth's surface.

lava: molten magma that has reached the Earth's surface.

lava: molten magma that has reached the Earth's surface.

magma: hot, thick, molten (liquid) rock found beneath the Earth’s surface;
formed mainly in the mantle.

magma: molten rock within the Earth, from which igneous rock is formed by
cooling.

magma: molten rock within the Earth, from which igneous rock is formed by
cooling.

mantle: the Earth's inner layer of molten rock, lying beneath the crust and
above the core of liquid iron and nickel.

mantle: the Earth's inner layer of molten rock, lying beneath the crust and
above the core of liquid iron and nickel.

mantle: the semi-molten interior of the Earth that lies between the core and the
crust making up nearly 80% of the Earth’s total volume; extends down to a depth
of about 1800 miles (2,900 kilometers) from the surface.

mechanical energy: the energy an object has because of its motion or position
and the forces acting on it.

megawatt (MW): a unit of power, equal to a thousand kilowatts (kW) or one
million watts(W). The watt is a unit of power (energy/time), the rate energy is
consumed or converted to electricity.

megawatt (MW): a unit of power, equal to a thousand kilowatts (kW) or one
million watts(W). The watt is a unit of power (energy/time), the rate energy is
consumed or converted to electricity. Assessment of the energy in geothermal
systems is commonly in terms of equivalent electrical power or MWe, which takes
into account the efficiency of conversion.

megawatt (MW): a unit of power, equal to a thousand kilowatts (kW) or one
million watts(W). The watt is a unit of power (energy/time), the rate energy is
consumed or converted to electricity. Assessment of the energy in geothermal
systems is commonly in terms of equivalent electrical power or MWe, which takes
into account the efficiency of conversion.

mineralised fluids: water and steam containing minerals such as silica, lithium
and boron. Also called geothermal water or geothermal fluids.

mineralised fluids: water and steam containing minerals such as silica, lithium
and boron. Also called geothermal water or geothermal fluids.

mineralized: containing minerals; for example, mineralized geothermal water
contains dissolved minerals from inside the Earth.

molecules: extremely tiny particles of which all materials are made .

mud pool: thermal surface feature which occurs where there is not enough water
to support a geyser or hot spring even though there may be some hot water below.
Steam and gas vapours bubble up through mud formed by the interaction of gases
with rock.

mud pool: thermal surface feature which occurs where there is not enough water
to support a geyser or hot spring even though there may be some hot water below.
Steam and gas vapours bubble up through mud formed by the interaction of gases
with rock.

mud pot (paint pot): thermal surface feature which occurs where there is not
enough water to support a geyser or hot spring even though there may be some hot
water below. Steam and gas vapors bubble up through mud formed by the
interaction of gases with rock.

natural gas: a gas mixture (mostly methane) trapped underground in many places
near the surface of the Earth; a fossil fuel.

nitrogen oxides (Nox): formed in combustion; appear as yellowish-brown clouds;
can irritate lungs, cause lung diseases, lead to formation of ozone (which is
harmful in the lower atmosphere, but necessary as protection from UV rays in the
upper atmosphere).

| a -c | d-g | h-n | p-r | s-z |

nonrenewable resource: resources that are not replaced or regenerated naturally
within a period of time that is useful; this includes fossil fuels, uranium and
other minerals.

operations and maintenance (O&M) cost: operating expenses are associated with
operating a facility (e.g. engineering costs). Maintenance expenses are that
portion of expenses consisting of labour, materials, and other direct and
indirect expenses incurred for preserving the operating efficiency or physical
condition of utility plants that are used for power production, transmission,
and distribution of energy.

operations and maintenance (O&M) cost: operating expenses are associated with
operating a facility (e.g. engineering costs). Maintenance expenses are that
portion of expenses consisting of labour, materials, and other direct and
indirect expenses incurred for preserving the operating efficiency or physical
condition of utility plants that are used for power production, transmission,
and distribution of energy.

particulates (particulate matter): dust, soot, smoke and other suspended matter;
can be respiratory irritants. Particulate matter smaller than 10 microns (pm10)
has been found to be particularly harmful to health.

pasteurize: to use high temperatures to destroy disease-causing bacteria.

peaking plants: electricity generating plants that are operated to meet the peak
or maximum load on the system. The cost of energy from such plants is usually
higher than from baseload plants.

peaking plants: electricity generating plants that are operated to meet the peak
or maximum load on the system. The cost of energy from such plants is usually
higher than from baseload plants.

permeability: the capacity of a substance (such as rock) to transmit a fluid.
The degree of permeability depends on the number, size, and shape of the pores
and/or fractures in the rock and their interconnections. It is measured by the
time it takes a fluid of standard viscosity to move a given distance. The unit
of permeability is the Darcy.

permeability: the capacity of a substance (such as rock) to transmit a fluid.
The degree of permeability depends on the number, size, and shape of the pores
and/or fractures in the rock and their interconnections. It is measured by the
time it takes a fluid of standard viscosity to move a given distance. The unit
of permeability is the Darcy.

permeable: able to transmit water or other liquids; for example, rock with tiny
passageways between holes, fractured rock, and gravel are permeable.

petajoule (PJ): a joule is a unit of energy. A petajoule is 1015 joules.

petajoule (PJ): a joule is a unit of energy. A petajoule is 1015 joules.

plate tectonics: the study of the movement of large crustal plates (lithospheric
plates) of the Earth’s shell. The earth's shell is broken into several pieces
(12 large ones and several smaller ones). These plates move toward and away from
one another at about the rate our fingernails grow. The process that creates the
dynamic movement of the plates includes the convection of magma in the mantle
and lithosphere. Plate tectonics helps to explain continental drift, seafloor
spreading, volcanic eruptions and other geothermal phenomena, earthquakes,
mountain formation and the distribution of some plant and animal species.

porosity: the ratio of the aggregate volume of pore spaces in rock or soil to
its total volume, usually stated as a percentage.

porosity: the ratio of the aggregate volume of pore spaces in rock or soil to
its total volume, usually stated as a percentage.

porous: full of small holes (pores); able to be filled (permeated) by water,
air, or other materials.

porous: full of small holes (pores); able to be filled (permeated) by water,
air, or other materials.

porous: full of small holes (pores); able to be filled (permeated) by water,
air, or other materials.

power plant: a central station where electricity is produced using turbines and
generators.

| a -c | d-g | h-n | p-r | s-z |

pressure: the force exerted over a certain area. Our atmosphere exerts pressure
on the surface of the earth, and layers of rock exert pressure on those below
them.

radiant energy: energy (heat) that is transferred by rays or waves, especially
electromagnetic waves, through space or another medium. Radiation.

renewable resource: a resource that can be used continuously without being used
up (because it regenerates itself within a useful amount of

rift zone: long narrow fractures in the crust found along ocean floor or on
land, from which lava flows out; often associated with spreading centers from
which tectonic plates are diverging, such as the mid-Atlantic Ridge.

salinity: a measure of the quantity or concentration of dissolved salts in
water.

salinity: a measure of the quantity or concentration of dissolved salts in
water.

separated water: water discharged from a separator.

separated water: water discharged from a separator.

separator: a pressure vessel used to separate water and steam, normally by
centrifugal action.

separator: a pressure vessel used to separate water and steam, normally by
centrifugal action.

sinter: a mineral crust or deposit formed from the minerals (mainly silica) in
geothermal water, especially from geysers.

sinter: a mineral crust or deposit formed from the minerals (mainly silica) in
geothermal water, especially from geysers.

steam: the vapor form of water that develops when water boils. Steam is made of
very tiny heated water particles (molecules) which are bouncing around and
bumping into each other at very high speeds. These heated water molecules are
also spreading out and expanding in every direction they can. If we confine or
trap water in a container, with a pipe as an opening, and heat the water to
steam, it will create great pressure in the container and will rush out the pipe
with a great deal of force. This force (the "power" of steam) can be put to work
turning a turbine connected to an electricity generator.

| a -c | d-g | h-n | p-r | s-z |

steam: the vapour form of water that develops when water boils. Steam is made of
very tiny heated water particles (molecules) which are bouncing around and
bumping into each other at very high speeds. These heated water molecules are
also spreading out and expanding in every direction they can. If we confine or
trap water in a container, with a pipe as an opening, and heat the water to
steam, it will create great pressure in the container and will rush out the pipe
with a great deal of force. This force can be put to work turning a turbine
connected to an electricity generator.

steam: the vapour form of water that develops when water boils. Steam is made of
very tiny heated water particles (molecules) which are bouncing around and
bumping into each other at very high speeds. These heated water molecules are
also spreading out and expanding in every direction they can. If we confine or
trap water in a container, with a pipe as an opening, and heat the water to
steam, it will create great pressure in the container and will rush out the pipe
with a great deal of force. This force can be put to work turning a turbine
connected to an electricity generator.

subduction boundary: one of two types of converging plate boundaries which
occurs when one plate plunges under another overriding plate.

subsidence: a sinking of an area of the Earth's crust due to fluid withdrawal
and pressure decline.

subsidence: a sinking of an area of the Earth's crust due to fluid withdrawal
and pressure decline.

sulfur oxides (Sox): pungent, colorless gases (including sulfur dioxide (SO2);
formed primarily by the combustion of fossil fuels; may damage the respiratory
tract, as well as plants and trees.

sustainable: material or energy sources which, if managed carefully, will
provide the needs of a community or society indefinitely, without depriving
future generations of their needs.

therapeutic: the treatment of disease or other disorder; something that may
benefit health. (Geothermal) hot springs are often thought of as therapeutic.

time). Examples include water (small hydro) and wind power, solar energy, and
geothermal energy.

transmission lines: wires that transport electricity over long distances.

turbine: a machine for generating rotary mechanical power from the energy of a
stream of fluid (such as water, steam, or hot gas). Turbines convert the kinetic
energy of fluids to mechanical energy through the principles of impulse and
reaction, or a mixture of the two.

turbine: a machine for generating rotary mechanical power from the energy of a
stream of fluid (such as water, steam, or hot gas). Turbines convert the kinetic
energy of fluids to mechanical energy through the principles of impulse and
reaction, or a mixture of the two.

turbine: a machine with blades that are rotated by the forceful movement of
liquid or gas, such as air, steam or water or a combination.

vFlow™ Internal Variable-Speed Water Flow Control vFlow™ builds the major water
circulation components into the heat pump for a cleaner, smaller installation
and intelligently varies water flow to minimize pump energy consumption. This is
ClimateMaster’s most energy efficient water flow option and is currently
available only in the Tranquility® Digital Series.

vaporize: to change into the gas form anything which is normally a liquid or a
solid; the term is most commonly is used in reference to water (which vaporizes
to steam).

volcano: an opening in the Earth's crust from which lava, steam, and/or ashes
erupt (or flow), either continuously or at intervals.

voltage: the measure of the amount of force that "pushes" an electric current..

water phases: the change of water from one state to another. The change from ice
to liquid is melting; the reverse process is freezing. The change from liquid to
gas is evaporation and the product is water vapor; the change from water vapor
to liquid is called condensation. Evaporation and condensation are both
important functions in geothermal phenomena and in geothermal technology.

water phases: the change of water from one state to another. The change from ice
to liquid is melting; the reverse process is freezing. The change from liquid to
gas is evaporation and the product is water vapour or steam; the change from
water vapour to liquid is called condensation. Evaporation and condensation are
both important functions in geothermal phenomena and in geothermal technology.

water phases: the change of water from one state to another. The change from ice
to liquid is melting; the reverse process is freezing. The change from liquid to
gas is evaporation and the product is water vapour or steam; the change from
water vapour to liquid is called condensation. Evaporation and condensation are
both important functions in geothermal phenomena and in geothermal technology.
